.TH rdesktop 1 "2017-10-28"
.SH NAME
.I rdesktop
\- Remote Desktop Protocol client
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rdesktop [options] server[:port]
.br
.B rdesktop [options] file.rdp
.br
.B rdesktop
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I rdesktop
is a client for Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP), used in a number of Microsoft products.
It is known to work with Microsoft Windows server versions ranging from NT 4 terminal
server to Windows Server 2012 R2.
If no port is specified, rdesktop connects to the standard RDP TCP port 3389.
As an alternative to specifying a server directly, rdesktop can read common
connection settings from a Microsoft .rdp file. Command-line options override
matching settings read from the file. When started without arguments on an X11 display,
rdesktop opens a graphical connection launcher. The launcher maps its fields to the
same command-line options documented below; starting rdesktop with any argument keeps
the historical command-line behaviour.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B No arguments
Open the X11 connection launcher. The launcher provides connection fields and
an Options dialog grouping the command-line options into General, Display, Local
resources, Performance, Security, and Advanced tabs. The launcher uses a
built-in raster banner. When Xft is available at build time, launcher text is
rendered out-of-the-box with fontconfig/Xft. The default fallback list tries
Ubuntu Sans 11 pt, Adwaita Sans 11 pt, Google Noto Serif 11 pt, Cantarell
11 pt, DejaVu Sans 11 pt, San Francisco 13 pt, and Segoe UI 9 pt before
falling back to generic sans-serif fonts. This requires rdesktop to be built
with Xft/fontconfig development headers available. Without Xft, the launcher
still works but falls back to legacy X11 core fonts, which look noticeably less
like a modern desktop UI. If the launcher text does not visually change after
selecting modern fonts, install the Xft/fontconfig development package and
common UI font packages, then rerun ./bootstrap and ./configure before
rebuilding.

The launcher also honours the optional X resources
Brdesktop.launcher.fontR, Brdesktop.launcher.titleFontR, and
Brdesktop.launcher.smallFontR for site or user overrides. They are not
required for normal use.

.TP
.BR "-u <username>"
Username for authentication on the server.
.TP
.BR "-d <domain>"
Domain for authentication.
.TP
.BR "-s <shell>"
Startup shell for the user - starts a specific application instead of Explore.
If SeamlessRDP is enabled this is the application which is started in seamless mode.

On modern Windows and RDS deployments, launching a single application may
require RemoteApp/server-side policy configuration. If the server is not
configured to allow that application, the option can result in a normal
desktop session or a server-side access error instead of launching the
requested command.
.TP
.BR "-c <directory>"
The initial working directory for the user.  Often used in combination with -s
to set up a fixed login environment.
.TP
.BR "-p <password>"
The password to authenticate with.  Note that this may have no effect if
"Always prompt for password" is enabled on the server.  WARNING: if you specify
a password on the command line it may be visible to other users when they use
tools like ps.  Use -p - to make rdesktop request a password at startup (from
standard input).
.TP
.BR "-n <hostname>"
Client hostname.  Normally rdesktop automatically obtains the hostname of the
client.
.TP
.BR "-k <keyboard-map>"
Keyboard layout to emulate.  This requires a corresponding keymap file to be
installed.  The standard keymaps provided with rdesktop follow the RFC1766
naming scheme: a language code followed by a country code if necessary - e.g.
en-us, en-gb, de, fr, sv, etc.

The default keyboard map depends on the current locale (LC_* and LANG
environment variables). If the current locale is unknown, the default
keyboard map is en-us (a US English keyboard).

The keyboard maps are file names, which means that they are case
sensitive. The standard keymaps are all in lowercase.

The keyboard maps are searched relative to the directories
$HOME/.rdesktop/keymaps, KEYMAP_PATH (specified at build time), and
$CWD/keymaps, in this order. The keyboard-map argument can also be an
absolute filename.

The special value `none' can be used instead of a keyboard map.
In this case, rdesktop will guess the scancodes from the X11 event key
codes using an internal mapping method. This method only supports the
basic alphanumeric keys and may not work properly on all platforms
so its use is discouraged.
.TP
.BR "-g <geometry>"
Desktop geometry (WxH[@DPI][+X[+Y]]). If geometry is the special word
"workarea", the geometry will be fetched from the extended window
manager hints property _NET_WORKAREA, from the root window. The
geometry can also be specified as a percentage of the whole screen,
e.g. "-g 80%", "-g 80%x70%".

If the specified geometry depends on the screen size, and the screen
size is changed, rdesktop will automatically reconnect using the new
screen size. This requires that rdesktop has been compiled with RandR
support.

The optional DPI parameter should be specified if the screen rdesktop
is being displayed on is too far from 96 DPI for unscaled Windows to
be readable. Windows currently accepts values from 96 to 480.

Offset placement of window is optional. Starting point is upper left corner of screen.
Window manager might push into visible area, if a panel would be covered.
The schema is "-g <value>+<xoff>+<yoff>, f.e. "-g 30%+200+600".
.TP
.BR "-i"
Use password as smartcard pin. If a valid user certificate is matched in smart card
reader the password passed with \f-p\fR argument is used as pin for the smart card.
This feature also requires that smart card redirection is used using \f-r scard\fR argument.
.TP
.BR "-f"
Enable fullscreen mode.  This overrides the window manager and causes the
rdesktop window to fully cover the current screen.  Fullscreen mode can be
toggled at any time using Ctrl-Alt-Enter. The rdesktop window can be
iconified using Ctrl-Alt-Shift-Enter.
.TP
.BR "--multimon" ", " "/multimon"
Use the local XRandR monitor layout for fullscreen sessions and advertise it to
the server as an RDP monitor layout. This prevents servers from treating a
spanned desktop as one oversized monitor when multiple local monitors are used.
It cannot be combined with B-gR.
.TP
.BR "-b"
Force the server to send screen updates as bitmaps rather than using
higher-level drawing operations.
.TP
.BR "-t"
Disable use of remote control. This will disable features like seamless connection
sharing.
.TP
.BR "-A <seamlessrdpshell>"
Enable SeamlessRDP by specifying the path to seamless rdp shell. 
In this mode, rdesktop creates a X11 window for each window on the server side. 
This mode requires the SeamlessRDP server side component, which is available from 
\fIhttp://www.cendio.com/seamlessrdp/\fR.

When using this option, you should normally specify a startup shell which
launches the desired application through SeamlessRDP. 

Example: rdesktop -A 'c:\\seamlessrdp\\seamlessrdpshell.exe' -s 'notepad' mywts.domain.com

Any subsequential call to the above command line example will make use of the seamless 
connection sharing feature which spawns another notepad in the current connection to the
specified server and then exit.

.TP
.BR "-V <tls version>"
Set the Transport Level Security (also known as SSL) Version used.
Should be one of the following values: 1.0, 1.1, 1.2. By default all
versions are supported.
.TP
.BR "-B"
Use the BackingStore of the Xserver instead of the integrated one in
rdesktop.
.TP
.BR "-e"
Disable encryption.  This option is only needed (and will only work) if you
have a French version of NT TSE.
.TP
.BR "-E"
Disable encryption from client to server.  This sends an encrypted login packet,
but everything after this is unencrypted (including interactive logins).
.TP
.BR "-m"
Do not send mouse motion events.  This saves bandwidth, although some Windows
applications may rely on receiving mouse motion.
.TP
.BR "-M"
Use local X cursor inherited from window manager instead of server cursor. This
is mostly useful with -m, but is also useful if the server is sending bogus
mouse cursors.
.TP
.BR "-C"
Use private colourmap.  This will improve colour accuracy on an 8-bit display,
but rdesktop will appear in false colour when not focused.
.TP
.BR "-D"
Hide window manager decorations, by using MWM hints. 
.TP
.BR "-K"
Do not override window manager key bindings.  By default rdesktop attempts
to grab all keyboard input when it is in focus.
.TP
.BR "-J <modifier combination>"
Configure a modifier-only hotkey that releases the active keyboard grab when
the modifiers are pressed and released.  This can be used to temporarily return
keyboard shortcuts such as workspace switching to the local window manager
without disabling normal keyboard grabbing with -K.  The combination uses
underscore or plus separated modifiers, for example ctrl_alt, lctrl_ralt,
super, or off.  After ungrabbing, click in the rdesktop window to grab the
keyboard again.
.TP
.BR "-S <button size>"
Enable single application mode. This option can be used when running a
single, maximized application (via -s). When the minimize button of
the windows application is pressed, the rdesktop window is minimized
instead of the remote application. The maximize/restore button is
disabled. For this to work, you must specify the correct button
size, in pixels. The special word "standard" means 18 pixels. 
.TP
.BR "-T <title>"
Sets the window title. The title must be specified using an UTF-8 string. 
.TP
.BR "-w <class>"
Sets the X11 WM_CLASS name. This is useful for window manager rules, desktop
launchers and distinguishing multiple rdesktop or SeamlessRDP applications.
.TP
.BR "--window-icon" " " "file.png" ", " "/icon:" "file.png"
Load a PNG file and use it as the X11 window icon. This is useful when
launching multiple rdesktop sessions from desktop files or scripts and assigning
different window-manager icons to each connection.
.TP
.BR "-N"
Enable numlock synchronization between the Xserver and the remote RDP
session.  This is useful with applications that looks at the numlock
state, but might cause problems with some Xservers like Xvnc. 
.TP
.BR "-X <windowid>"
Embed rdesktop-window in another window. The windowid is expected to
be decimal or hexadecimal (prefixed by 0x).
.TP
.BR "-a <bpp>"
Sets the colour depth for the connection (8, 15, 16, 24 or 32).
More than 8 bpp are only supported when connecting to Windows XP
(up to 16 bpp) or newer.  Note that the colour depth may also be
limited by the server configuration. The default value is the depth 
of the root window. 
.TP
.BR "-z"
Enable compression of the RDP datastream.
.TP
.BR "-x <experience>"
Changes default bandwidth performance behaviour for RDP5. By default only
theming is enabled, and all other options are disabled (corresponding
to modem (56 Kbps)). Setting experience to b[roadband] enables menu
animations and full window dragging. Setting experience to l[an] will
also enable the desktop wallpaper. Setting experience to m[odem]
requests that wallpaper, full window dragging, menu animations, theming
and cursor shadows are disabled. Experience can also be a hexadecimal
number containing the flags.

These flags are sent as RDP performance hints. The server, server-side
policy, Windows version or individual applications may still display
animations or transitions even when rdesktop requests the modem profile.
.TP
.BR "-P"
Enable caching of bitmaps to disk (persistent bitmap caching). This generally
improves performance (especially on low bandwidth connections) and reduces
network traffic at the cost of slightly longer startup and some disk space.
(10MB for 8-bit colour, 20MB for 15/16-bit colour, 30MB for 24-bit colour
and 40MB for 32-bit colour sessions)
.TP
.BR "-R"
Retry a fresh connection after network errors for the same timeout window used
by automatic reconnect. By default, rdesktop only enters the reconnect loop when
the server supplied an auto-reconnect cookie; this option also retries when no
cookie is available, which can create a new session depending on server policy.
rdesktop enables TCP keepalive on connected sockets and, where supported by the
platform, uses conservative TCP keepalive/user-timeout values so broken network
paths are detected instead of leaving the client apparently frozen indefinitely.
When the server advertises RDP heartbeat PDUs, missed heartbeats are also
treated as network errors and can trigger the same retry logic.
.TP
.BR "-r <device>"
Enable redirection of the specified device on the client, such
that it appears on the server. Note that the allowed
redirections may be restricted by the server configuration.

Following devices are currently supported:
.TP
.BR "-r comport:<comport>=<device>,..."
Redirects serial devices on your client to the
server. Note that if you need to change any settings on the serial device(s),
do so with an appropriate tool before starting rdesktop. In most
OSes you would use stty. Bidirectional/Read support requires Windows XP or newer.
In Windows 2000 it will create a port, but it's not seamless, most
shell programs will not work with it.
.TP
.BR "-r disk:<sharename>=<path>,..."
Redirects a path to the share \\\\tsclient\\<sharename> on the server
(requires Windows XP or newer). The share name is limited to 8
characters. 
.TP
.BR "-r lptport:<lptport>=<device>,..."
Redirects parallel devices on your client to the server.
Bidirectional/Read support requires Windows XP or newer. In Windows 2000
it will create a port, but it's not seamless, most shell programs will not work with
it.
.TP
.BR "-r printer:<printername>[=<driver>],..."
Redirects a printer queue on the client to the server. The <printername>
is the name of the queue in your local system. <driver> defaults to a
simple PS-driver unless you specify one. Keep in mind that you need a
100% match in the server environment, or the driver will fail. Printer
redirection passes the server-generated printer data to the local queue; if
the server-side driver emits data your local queue or printer does not
understand, the printer can output unreadable pages. Install or select a
server-side driver that matches the local print path. The first printer on
the command line will be set as your default printer.
.TP
.BR "-r sound:[local|off|remote]"
Redirects sound generated on the server to the client. "remote" only has
any effect when you connect to the console with the -0 option. (Requires
Windows XP or newer).
.TP
.BR "-r lspci"
Activates the lspci channel, which allows the server to enumerate the
clients PCI devices. See the file lspci-channel.txt in the
documentation for more information.
.TP
.BR "-r addin:<channel>=<command>"
Bridge an out-of-process static virtual channel add-in. The channel name must
be one to eight alphanumeric characters or underscores. Data received on the
RDP static virtual channel is written to the command standard input; data read
from the command standard output is sent back on the same channel. This is
intended for legacy third-party virtual channel add-ins such as thin-client
integrations.
.TP
.BR "-r scard[:<Scard Name>=<Alias Name>[;<Vendor Name>][,...]]"
Enables redirection of one or more smart-cards. You can provide
static name binding between GNU/Linux and Windows. To do this you
can use optional parameters as described: <Scard Name> - device name in
GNU/Linux and UNIX environment, <Alias Name> - device name shown in Windows environment
<Vendor Name> - optional device vendor name. For list of examples run
rdesktop without parameters.
.TP
.BR "-r clipboard:[off|PRIMARYCLIPBOARD|CLIPBOARD]"
Enable clipboard redirection. 'PRIMARYCLIPBOARD' looks at both PRIMARY and
CLIPBOARD when sending data to server. 'CLIPBOARD' looks at only 'CLIPBOARD'.
.TP
.BR "-0"
Attach to the console/admin session of the server (requires Windows Server
2003 or newer). The aliases `--admin` and `/admin` are also accepted for
users familiar with mstsc or FreeRDP syntax.
.TP
.BR "--shadow" " " "session-id" ", " "/shadow:" "session-id"
Request attachment to an existing server-side session id. This uses the RDP
client cluster session id field and is intended for Terminal Server shadowing
workflows where the target server is configured to allow remote control or
view-only shadow sessions. The session id must be obtained from the server, for
example with Windows tools such as Bquery sessionR or BqwinstaR.
.TP
.BR "--restricted-admin" ", " "/restrictedAdmin"
Request Restricted Admin mode over CredSSP. In this mode rdesktop authenticates
to CredSSP locally but sends empty logon credentials to the remote host. This
prevents forwarding the supplied domain credentials to the server and implies
.BR -0 .
.TP
.BR "--remote-guard" ", " "/remoteGuard"
Request Remote Credential Guard negotiation over CredSSP. This requires
Kerberos/GSSAPI CredSSP support and a server that advertises redirected
authentication support. rdesktop also registers the RDPEAR authentication
redirection channel, handles Remote Guard protocol framing, obtains the initial
Negotiate logon credential from the in-tree RDPEAR helper, and routes
Kerberos/NTLM package calls through the helper. Without an explicit helper
command, rdesktop uses the installed \fBrdesktop-rdpear-helper\fR from PATH.
The default helper uses the local Kerberos credential cache to produce GSSAPI
Remote Guard tokens for the target TERMSRV service.
.TP
.BR "--remote-guard-helper" " " "command"
Use a specific helper command for RDPEAR Kerberos/NTLM package calls. The
installed \fBrdesktop-rdpear-helper\fR command implements the helper transport
contract, uses the local Kerberos credential cache by default, and still allows
overriding the initial Remote Guard logon credential with
\fBRDESKTOP_RDPEAR_LOGON_CRED_FILE\fR or
\fBRDESKTOP_RDPEAR_LOGON_CRED_HEX\fR. It can also delegate package-specific calls
to the command named by \fBRDESKTOP_RDPEAR_BACKEND\fR using the same binary
transport contract. Built-in handling answers Kerberos/NTLM version negotiation
and uses GSSAPI for Kerberos/Negotiate token generation before falling back to an
explicit backend. The helper receives a little-endian binary request on stdin:
32-bit package-name length, package-name bytes, 32-bit request length, request
bytes. It must reply on stdout with 32-bit helper transport status, 32-bit
response length, response bytes. Supplying this option implies
.BR --remote-guard .
.TP
.BR "-4"
Use RDP version 4.
.TP
.BR "-5"
Use RDP version 5 (default).
.TP
.BR "-v"
Enable verbose output
.PP

.SH "CredSSP / NLA authentication"
rdesktop supports CredSSP/NLA over TLS. Password-based NLA uses an internal
NTLMv2/SPNEGO client and does not require a pre-existing Kerberos ticket.
Kerberos-based CredSSP remains available when rdesktop is built with optional
GSSAPI/Kerberos support and the user has a valid TGT.
Sensitive NTLM/CredSSP byte previews are hidden by default. Set
.BR RDESKTOP_CREDSSP_TRACE=1
with
.BR RDESKTOP_DEBUG=Core,Protocol
only when collecting diagnostic logs.
.PP
.SH "CredSSP Smartcard options"
.TP
.BR "--sc-csp-name <name>"
Specify the CSP (Crypto Service Provider) to use on the windows side for the smartcard
authentication. CSP is the driver for your smartcard and it seems like this is required
to be specified for CredSSP authentication. For Swedish NetID the following CSP name is
used; "Net iD - CSP".
.TP
.BR "--sc-container-name <name>"
Specify the container name, usually this is the username for default container and it seems
like this is required to be specified for CredSSP authentication.
.TP
.BR "--sc-reader-name <name>"
Specify the reader name to be used to prevent the pin code being sent to wrong card if there
are several readers.
.TP
.BR "--sc-card-name <name>"
Specify the card name for example; "Telia EID IP5a".
.PP

.SH "EXIT VALUES"
.PP 
.IP "\fB0\fP"
RDP session terminated normally
.IP "\fB1\fP"
Administrator initiated disconnect (also returned for logoff by Windows XP joined to a domain)
.IP "\fB2\fP"
Administrator initiated logout
.IP "\fB3\fP"
Server idle session time limit reached
.IP "\fB4\fP"
Server active session time limit reached
.IP "\fB5\fP"
The session was replaced
.IP "\fB6\fP"
The server is out of memory
.IP "\fB7\fP"
The server denied the connection
.IP "\fB8\fP"
The server denied the connection for security reasons
.IP "\fB9\fP"
The user cannot connect to the server due to insufficient access
privileges
.IP "\fB10\fP"
The server does not accept saved user credentials and requires that
the user enter their credentials for each connection
.IP "\fB11\fP"
Disconnect initiated by user
.IP "\fB12\fP"
Logout initiated by user
.IP "\fB16\fP"
Internal licensing error
.IP "\fB17\fP"
No license server available
.IP "\fB18\fP"
No valid license available
.IP "\fB19\fP"
Invalid licensing message from client
.IP "\fB20\fP"
The client license has been modified and does no longer match the hardware ID
.IP "\fB21\fP"
The client license is in an invalid format
.IP "\fB22\fP"
Network error during licensing protocol
.IP "\fB23\fP"
Licensing protocol was not completed
.IP "\fB24\fP"
Incorrect client license encryption
.IP "\fB25\fP"
Can't upgrade or renew license
.IP "\fB26\fP"
The server is not licensed to accept remote connections
.IP "\fB30\fP"
The target endpoint chosen by the broker could not be found
.IP "\fB32\fP"
The target endpoint is disconnecting from the broker
.IP "\fB34\fP"
Error occurred while being redirected by broker
.IP "\fB35\fP"
Error while the endpoint VM was being awakened by the broker
.IP "\fB36\fP"
Error while the endpoint VM was being started by the broker
.IP "\fB37\fP"
The IP address of the endpoint VM could not be determined by the broker
.IP "\fB38\fP"
No available endpoints in the connection broker pool
.IP "\fB39\fP"
Connection processing cancelled by the broker
.IP "\fB40\fP"
The connection settings could not be validated by the broker
.IP "\fB41\fP"
Timeout while the endpoint VM was being started by the broker
.IP "\fB42\fP"
Session monitoring error while the endpoint VM was being started by the broker
.IP "\fB50\fP"
The server can only host Remote Applications
.IP "\fB51\fP"
Update of session keys failed
.IP "\fB52\fP"
Decryption or session key creation failed
.IP "\fB53\fP"
Encryption failed
.IP "\fB62\fP"
The local client window was closed
.IP "\fB63\fP"
Some other, unknown error occurred
.IP "\fB64\fP"
Command line usage error
.IP "\fB69\fP"
A service or resource (such as memory) is unavailable
.IP "\fB70\fP"
An internal software error has been detected
.IP "\fB71\fP"
Operating system error
.IP "\fB76\fP"
Protocol error or unable to connect to remote host.

.PP 
.SH LINKS
Main website of rdesktop
.br
\fIhttp://www.rdesktop.org/
.LP
.PP
